Refactor initial conditions (#572)
HopkinsIDD/flepiMoP: documentation/gitbook/gempyor/model-implementation/specifying-initial-conditions.md

The `initial_conditions` section of the configuration file is detailed below. Note that in some cases, [the `seeding` section](specifying-seeding.md) can replace or complement the initial condition. To help you decide which to use please refer to the [Initial Conditions vs Seeding](./initial-conditions-vs-seeding.md) guide.

## Builtin Initial Condition Methods

Initial conditions are specified by the user in a configuration section named `initial_conditions`. It's not required that a user add this to their configuration file, but if this is not present a warning will be issued and it is assumed that the 'Default' method will be used for initial conditions. All initial conditions require a key called `method` that is a string corresponding to the type of initial conditions to use. For example, the minimum initial conditions configuration would be:

```yaml
initial_conditions:

>   method: Default

Reviewer: aside: weird that this is capitalized?

Author: This is maintaining the current behavior, can change if you would like.

```

Further configuration placed under the `initial_conditions` section is passed on to the method used and depends on the method. The methods included with `gempyor` are 'Default', 'SetInitialConditions', 'SetInitialConditionsFolderDraw', 'FromFile', 'InitialConditionsFolderDraw'.

### 'Default' Method

The 'Default' initial conditions will place the entire subpopulation into the first compartment specified by the model. For example:

```yaml
compartments:
  infection_stage: ["S", "I", "R"]
 
initial_conditions:
  method: default
```

Would place the entire subpopulation into the 'S' compartment. While this behavior is intuitive and helpful for small models, this can be surprising for larger models. For example:

```yaml
compartments:
  infection_stage: ["S", "I", "R"]
  age_group: ["child", "adult"]
 
initial_conditions:
  method: default
```

Would place the entire subpopulation into the 'S', 'child', 'unvaxxed' compartment. While 'S' usually makes sense for a model, declaring the entire subpopulation to be children is likely not reflective of reality. 

> ### 'SetInitialConditions' Method

Reviewer: new minor issue: supporting both this and FromFile seems wasteful (and confusing?)

If we want to support two *schema* for the files, and then load based on what the column headers are, that seems fine. But different config methods seems likely to confuse user.

Author: Yeah, I see that, but this is just maintaining the current behavior. Would we want to change that?

...
```

The simulation would be initiated on 2021-06-01 with these values in each compartment.

The initial conditions file must contain the following columns:

* `mc_value_type` – In model output files, this is either 'prevalence' or 'incidence', but only prevalence values are selected to be used as initial conditions, since compartmental models described the prevalence (number of individuals at any given time) in each compartment.
* `mc_name` – The name of the compartment for which the value is reported, which is a concatenation of the compartment status in each state type, e.g. "S\_adult\_unvaxxed" and must be in the same order as these groups are defined in the config for the model, e.g., you cannot say `unvaxxed_S_adult`.
* `subpop_1`, `subpop_2`, etc. – One column for each different subpopulation, containing the value of the number of individuals in the described compartment in that subpopulation at the given date. Note that these are named after the node names defined by the user in the `geodata` file.
* `date` – The calendar date in the simulation, in YYYY-MM-DD format. Only values with a date that matches to the simulation `start_date` will be used.

> ### 'SetInitialConditionsFolderDraw' and 'InitialConditionsFolderDraw' Methods

Reviewer: related to collapsing the other file types, feels like this should also be introspected. if the user offers a folder instead of a specific file, do folder draw mode.

```python
from typing import Literal

from gempyor.compartments import Compartments
from gempyor.initial_conditions import (
    InitialConditionsABC,
    register_initial_conditions_plugin,
)
from gempyor.parameters import Parameters
from gempyor.subpopulation_structure import SubpopulationStructure
import numpy as np
import numpy.typing as npt
from pydantic import Field

class TwoCompartmentInitialConditions(InitialConditionsABC):
    method: Literal["TwoCompartment"] = "TwoCompartment"
    weight: float = Field(gt=0.0, lt=1.0)
    
    def create_initial_conditions(
        self,
        sim_id: int,
        compartments: Compartments,
        subpopulation_structure: SubpopulationStructure,
    ) -> npt.NDArray[np.float64]:
        y0 = np.zeros((len(compartments.compartments), subpopulation_structure.nsubpops))
        y0[0, :] = self.weight * subpopulation_structure.subpop_pop
        y0[1, :] = (1.0 - self.weight) * subpopulation_structure.subpop_pop
        return y0

register_initial_conditions_plugin(TwoCompartmentInitialConditions)

> ```

Reviewer: this might be a tall-ask, but: is there anyway to make this more like "define a method, with this name + this signature", and then have our machinery parse that on the fly into the proper plugin structure?

as written, this is asking a lot for people. anyway to use importlib here? ala, https://docs.python.org/3/library/importlib.html#importing-programmatically

Reviewer: though, i do like the ability to specify multiple methods once and then switch between them depending upon config key.

Author: I could look into that, although this seems more appropriate for when we get to the stage of a general purpose plugin section? Might be a bit beyond the scope of this PR.

This file:

* Contains an initial conditions plugin class, `TwoCompartmentInitialConditions`, that subclasses `InitialConditionsABC`.
  * Has a required `method` attribute that determines this plugin's type. Note that plugins can have multiple values for `method` if they implement different behaviors.
  * Has an additional `weight` attribute which is required to be configured by the user since it does not have a default value.
  * Implements a `create_initial_conditions` method that takes at least `sim_id`, `compartments`, and `subpopulation_structure` as arguments and returns a numpy array of dimension `(# comparments, # subpopulations)`.
    * This plugin weights the subpopulation population between the first two compartments by the `weight` attribute.
* Registers the initial conditions plugin with `gempyor` by calling the `register_initial_conditions_plugin` function.

To use this plugin, your configuration file would look like:

```yaml
compartments:
  infection_stage: ["S", "I", "R"]
 
initial_conditions:
  method: TwoCompartment
  module: model_input/my_initial_conditions.py

>   weight: 0.5

Reviewer: `weight` is a weird special parameter.

i need to think a bit about this one - is it holdover from old interface?

rather than a class field, should `weight` be handled more like ...you can put any variables that only your initial conditions script uses in this config section and they'll get passed in just like normal parameters?

Author: I think if we want to pass the configuration as arguments rather than having them as attributes of the class that would require a rethink of the current pydantic usage. I'll add it to the todo list to investigate.

Downside to switching to arguments would be you loose any config parse time validations, instead errors like `weight` being `-0.1` would only be discovered at runtime.

        mean: 0.0
        sd: 0.75
  ...
```

And your custom plugin looked like:

```python
from typing import Literal

from gempyor.compartments import Compartments
from gempyor.initial_conditions import (
    InitialConditionsABC,
    register_initial_conditions_plugin,
)
from gempyor.parameters import Parameters
from gempyor.subpopulation_structure import SubpopulationStructure
import numpy as np
import numpy.typing as npt
from scipy.special import expit

class TwoCompartmentInitialConditions(InitialConditionsABC):
    method: Literal["TwoCompartment"] = "TwoCompartment"
    
    def create_initial_conditions(
        self,
        sim_id: int,
        compartments: Compartments,
        subpopulation_structure: SubpopulationStructure,
        alpha: float,
    ) -> npt.NDArray[np.float64]:
        weight = expit(alpha).item()
        y0 = np.zeros((len(compartments.compartments), subpopulation_structure.nsubpops))
        y0[0, :] = [weight * pop for pop in subpopulation_structure.subpop_pop]
        y0[1, :] = [(1.0 - weight) * pop for pop in subpopulation_structure.subpop_pop]
        return y0

register_initial_conditions_plugin(TwoCompartmentInitialConditions)
```

> Note that in the above plugin an additional argument has been added to `create_initial_conditions` whose name, `alpha`, corresponds to the SEIR parameter name. You can finally use this plugin in your configuration file:

Reviewer: nice. also feels like we should be telling people here what happens if they typo `alfa` instead - presumably some "could not find parameter ..." error?

Author: That's here:

https://github.com/HopkinsIDD/flepiMoP/blob/ac61e062582c7d44714df8b264d8c0ffc1d6521a/flepimop/gempyor_pkg/src/gempyor/parameters.py#L416-L421

I can add it to the todo list to add this to the documentation with an example.

## Builtin Initial Condition Methods

Initial conditions are specified by the user in a configuration section named `initial_conditions`. It's not required that a user add this to their configuration file, but if this is not present a warning will be issued and it is assumed that the 'Default' method will be used for initial conditions. All initial conditions require a key called `method` that is a string corresponding to the type of initial conditions to use. For example, the minimum initial conditions configuration would be:

```yaml
initial_conditions:
  method: Default
```

Further configuration placed under the `initial_conditions` section is passed on to the method used and depends on the method. The methods included with `gempyor` are 'Default', 'SetInitialConditions', 'SetInitialConditionsFolderDraw', 'FromFile', 'InitialConditionsFolderDraw'.

### 'Default' Method

The 'Default' initial conditions will place the entire subpopulation into the first compartment specified by the model. For example:

```yaml
compartments:
  infection_stage: ["S", "I", "R"]
 
initial_conditions:

>   method: default

Reviewer: i'm fine w/ caps vs not (prefer not, but for now let's prioritize minimizing changes)

```suggestion
  method: Default
```

```

Would place the entire subpopulation into the 'S' compartment. While this behavior is intuitive and helpful for small models, this can be surprising for larger models. For example:

```yaml
compartments:
  infection_stage: ["S", "I", "R"]
  age_group: ["child", "adult"]
 
initial_conditions:

>   method: default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  method: Default
```

---
description: |
  This section describes how to specify the values
  of each model state at the simulation start time.
---

# Specifying Initial Conditions

## Overview

> In order for the models specified previously to be dynamically simulated the state of the system at the initial time must be specified, this is done via initial conditions. Initial conditions describe the value of each variable in the model at the time point that the simulation is to start. For example, on day zero of an outbreak, we may assume that the entire population is susceptible except for one single infected individual. Alternatively, we could assume that some portion of the population already has prior immunity due to vaccination or previous infection. Different initial conditions lead to different model trajectories.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order for the previously specified models to be dynamically simulated the state of the system at the initial time must be specified, which is done via initial conditions. Initial conditions describe the value of each variable in the model at the time point that the simulation is to start. For example, on day zero of an outbreak, we may assume that the entire population is susceptible except for one infected individual. Alternatively, we could assume that some portion of the population already has prior immunity due to vaccination or previous infection. Different initial conditions lead to different model trajectories.
```

Sorry that's really picky haha but for clarity and flow!

```yaml
initial_conditions:
  method: Default
```

Further configuration placed under the `initial_conditions` section is passed on to the method used and depends on the method. The methods included with `gempyor` are 'Default', 'SetInitialConditions', 'SetInitialConditionsFolderDraw', 'FromFile', 'InitialConditionsFolderDraw'.

### 'Default' Method

The 'Default' initial conditions will place the entire subpopulation into the first compartment specified by the model. For example:

```yaml
compartments:
  infection_stage: ["S", "I", "R"]
 
initial_conditions:
  method: Default
```

Would place the entire subpopulation into the 'S' compartment. While this behavior is intuitive and helpful for small models, this can be surprising for larger models. For example:

```yaml
compartments:
  infection_stage: ["S", "I", "R"]
  age_group: ["child", "adult"]
 
initial_conditions:
  method: Default
```

Would place the entire subpopulation into the 'S', 'child', 'unvaxxed' compartment. While 'S' usually makes sense for a model, declaring the entire subpopulation to be children is likely not reflective of reality. 

### 'SetInitialConditions' Method

> With this method users can specify arbitrary initial conditions in a convenient formatted input CSV or parquet file. For example, for a model with the following `compartments` and `initial_conditions` sections:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this method users can specify arbitrary initial conditions in a conveniently formatted input CSV or parquet file. For example, for a model with the following `compartments` and `initial_conditions` sections:
```
